The four phases of project management
provide a framework for leading a project
from inception to delivery.
The four phases answer questions
such as how do I get started?
What comes next?
And what steps should I take to move a project forward?
The phases give you and your team structure and clarity
for completing a project,
and provide a standardized process
for reliably achieving project goals.
The four phases of project management
are project initiation, planning,
execution and monitoring and closure.
We'll describe what each phase means
and give you one main tip for implementation.
The first phase is project initiation.
The initiation is everything that happens
before a project is approved.
It includes a project proposal,
and approval process by the client or executive management.
There are two key questions that determine
if a project will get approved or denied.
First, is the project feasible?
What are the project boundaries,
and do you have the resources required
to complete the project?
And second, is the project valuable?
Is it profitable financially or strategically?
The initiation phase involves conceptualizing a project
at a high level, determining its costs and benefits,
identifying its key stakeholders
and drafting a general project workflow
to help answer those two questions.
The biggest tip for the initiation phase
is to identify and clearly communicate a business problem
that the project will solve.
Identify what the problem is.
Describe alternatives for solving it.
And explain why this project is the best option.
After a project gets the green light,
it moves into the planning phase.
The planning phase is incredibly important.
It creates the foundation for your project's execution,
and it involves breaking down the project goals
into smaller, more manageable action items called tasks.
You'll need to define the tasks necessary
to complete the project.
Determine who's responsible for them.
Put tasks in the order they need to happen.
Group tasks to form key project milestones,
and set deadlines for each task and milestone.
Our biggest tip for the planning phase
is to create a thorough project plan
that documents the project objectives,
deliverables, scope, budget and schedule of tasks.
Your project team should always have access
to the project plan for reference and direction.
An official project kickoff meeting with your team
typically signals the transition between the planning phase
and the execution and monitoring phase, which is up next.
In this phase, project team members perform the tasks needed
to achieve project objectives
and create project deliverables.
At the same time, the project manager
monitors the team's progress, mitigates risks,
identifies and removes roadblocks
and directs any necessary changes
to meet the team's allotted cost, time and scope.
One tip for the execution and monitoring phase
is to create clear channels of communication.
Check in regularly with your team,
and encourage team members to share project setbacks.
That will help you prevent delays
and resolve issues early.
However, just because you've executed a project
doesn't mean that your work is over.
Let's move on to the fourth and final phase
of project management.
The final phase is the project's closure.
Closure occurs when you achieve your project goals
and deliver the final project to its intended client,
users or executive management.
Always double check
that you've fulfilled project requirements
and created all defined project deliverables
before signing off on a project.
A good practice while implementing this phase
is to conduct a debrief meeting with your team
to reflect on how the project went, evaluate performance
and identify opportunities to improve future projects.
All together, the four phases of project management
are initiation, planning,
execution and monitoring and closure.
Follow these phases in this order
to make sure you don't miss any key steps
in the project management process.